README.md, before:

# Database Benchmark Report Framework

A modular framework for running and documenting database benchmarks, with a focus on comparing **Exasol** with
other database systems. This repository provides reusable building blocks to launch benchmark environments,
collect detailed system information, run benchmark workloads, and generate reports documenting the results.

## Features

- 🏗️ **Modular Architecture**: Fine-grained templates for setup, execution, and reporting
- ☁️ **Multi-Cloud Support**: Infrastructure automation with separate instances per database
- 📊 **Benchmark Workloads**: TPC-H with support for custom workloads
- 📝 **Self-Contained Reports**: Generate reproducible reports with all attachments
- 🔧 **Extensible**: Easy to add new systems, workloads, and cloud providers
- 📈 **Rich Visualizations**: Automated generation of performance plots and tables
- 🔍 **Result Verification**: Validate query correctness against expected outputs

## Requirements

- Python 3.10+
- **Terraform** (for cloud infrastructure) - [Installation Guide](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/install)

## Quick Start

> [!TIP]
> You might have to set up a python virtual environment for installing python packages.

> [!CAUTION]
> The sample benchmark uses AWS cloud infrastructure. See [Getting Started Guide](user-docs/GETTING_STARTED.md)
> for detailed cloud setup instructions.
> Note that AWS infrastructure is usually not free to use.

```shell
# 1. Clone and enter the repository
git clone https://github.com/exasol/benchkit.git
cd benchkit

# 2. Install dependencies and local package
python -m pip install -e .

# 3. Copy and edit example environment
cp .env.example .env
$EDITOR .env

# 3b. (temporary) fix hardcoded ssh-key names in 'env' section of configuration
$EDITOR configs/exa_vs_ch_1g.yaml

# 4. Validate your configuration
python scripts/check_aws_credentials.py --config configs/exa_vs_ch_1g.yaml

# 5. Run sample benchmark
make all CFG=configs/exa_vs_ch_1g.yaml

# 6. Clean up AWS resources
make infra-destroy CFG=configs/exa_vs_ch_1g.yaml

# 7. view benchmark report
...TBD
```

## Usage

The framework provides 9 commands for complete benchmark lifecycle management:

```bash
# Manage infrastructure
benchkit infra apply --provider aws --config configs/my_benchmark.yaml

# System information collection
benchkit probe --config configs/my_benchmark.yaml

# Run benchmarks
benchkit run --config configs/my_benchmark.yaml [--systems exasol] [--queries Q01,Q06]

# Generate reports
benchkit report --config configs/my_benchmark.yaml

# Other commands: execute, status, package, verify, cleanup
```

**Status Command** provides comprehensive project insights:

- Overview of all projects (probe, benchmark, report status)
- Detailed status for specific configs (system info, infrastructure, timing)
- Cloud infrastructure details (IPs, connection strings)
- Multiple config support and smart project lookup

📖 **See [Getting Started Guide](user-docs/GETTING_STARTED.md) for comprehensive CLI documentation and examples.**

## Repository Structure (User Version)

```
benchkit/
├── benchkit/                  # Core framework
├── configs/                   # Benchmark configurations
└── results/                   # Generated results (auto-created)
```

See [Developer Guide](dev-docs/DEVELOPERS.md) for a more detailed structure definition.

## Defining Your Own Benchmarks

You can easily create your own benchmark by creating a yaml configuration file combining

- One infrastructure provider (aws/docker/local/...)
- One workload (benchmark type) to be executed
- Multiple systems (software) to be tested

📖 **See [Getting Started Guide](user-docs/GETTING_STARTED.md) for information on how to create
benchmark configurations using supported modules.**

## Support Matrix

### Setup / Installation

| system     | local | aws | docker | gcp | azure |
|------------|-------|-----|--------|-----|-------|
| Exasol     | ✗     | ✓   | ✗      | ✗   | ✗     | 
| ClickHouse | ✗     | ✓   | ✗      | ✗   | ✗     |

### Workloads

<!-- link definitions for table headers -->
[estuary]: benchkit/workloads/estuary/README.md "Estuary Warehouse Report"

| system     | tpch | [estuary]       |
|------------|------|-----------------|
| Exasol     | ✓    | ✓<sup>(1)</sup> |
| ClickHouse | ✓    | ✗<sup>(1)</sup> |

Notes:

1. Work in Progress


## Documentation

### For Users

- 📖 [Getting Started Guide](user-docs/GETTING_STARTED.md) - Installation, usage, and examples

### For Developers

- 🔧 [Extending the Framework](dev-docs/EXTENDING.md) - Adding systems, workloads, and features

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the LICENSE file for details.
All names used are copyright and owned by the respective companies.

---

Built with ❤️ for reproducible database benchmarking.

Commit message:

Tcp/streamload (#30)
- added: --config parameter mapped to environment variable `BENCHKIT_CONFIG`
- added: streaming data generator class for TPC-H
- added: 'DataFormat' enum for data format types
- changed: DataFormat is mandatory argument for load_data_from_iterable
- added: loading from DATA_LIST and CSV for exasol system
- fixed: Different fixes mostly bugs from recent changes.

---------

Co-authored-by: Oleksandr Kozachuk <oleksandr.kozachuk@exasol.com>

README.md, after:

# Database Benchmark Report Framework

A modular framework for running and documenting database benchmarks, with a focus on comparing **Exasol** with
other database systems. This repository provides reusable building blocks to launch benchmark environments,
collect detailed system information, run benchmark workloads, and generate reports documenting the results.

## Features

- 🏗️ **Modular Architecture**: Fine-grained templates for setup, execution, and reporting
- ☁️ **Multi-Cloud Support**: Infrastructure automation with separate instances per database
- 📊 **Benchmark Workloads**: TPC-H with support for custom workloads
- 📝 **Self-Contained Reports**: Generate reproducible reports with all attachments
- 🔧 **Extensible**: Easy to add new systems, workloads, and cloud providers
- 📈 **Rich Visualizations**: Automated generation of performance plots and tables
- 🔍 **Result Verification**: Validate query correctness against expected outputs

## Requirements

- Python 3.10+
- **Terraform** (for cloud infrastructure) - [Installation Guide](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/install)

## Quick Start

> [!TIP]
> You might have to set up a python virtual environment for installing python packages.

> [!CAUTION]
> The sample benchmark uses AWS cloud infrastructure. See [Getting Started Guide](user-docs/GETTING_STARTED.md)
> for detailed cloud setup instructions.
> Note that AWS infrastructure is usually not free to use.

```shell
# 1. Clone and enter the repository
git clone https://github.com/exasol/benchkit.git
cd benchkit

# 2. Install dependencies and local package
python -m pip install -e .

# 3. Copy and edit example environment
cp .env.example .env
$EDITOR .env

# 3b. (temporary) fix hardcoded ssh-key names in 'env' section of configuration
$EDITOR configs/exa_vs_ch_1g.yaml

# 4. Validate your configuration
python scripts/check_aws_credentials.py --config configs/exa_vs_ch_1g.yaml

# 5. Run sample benchmark
make all CFG=configs/exa_vs_ch_1g.yaml

# 6. Clean up AWS resources
make infra-destroy CFG=configs/exa_vs_ch_1g.yaml

# 7. view benchmark report
...TBD
```

## Usage

The framework provides 9 commands for complete benchmark lifecycle management:

```bash
# Manage infrastructure
benchkit infra apply --provider aws --config configs/my_benchmark.yaml

# System information collection
benchkit probe --config configs/my_benchmark.yaml

# Run benchmarks
benchkit run --config configs/my_benchmark.yaml [--systems exasol] [--queries Q01,Q06]

# Generate reports
benchkit report --config configs/my_benchmark.yaml

# Other commands: execute, status, package, verify, cleanup
```

> [!INFO]
> Note that the config parameter can also be set through an **environment variable** for all commands:
> 
> ```shell
> export BENCHKIT_CONFIG=configs/my_benchmark.yaml
> 
> benchkit check
> ```

**Status Command** provides comprehensive project insights:

- Overview of all projects (probe, benchmark, report status)
- Detailed status for specific configs (system info, infrastructure, timing)
- Cloud infrastructure details (IPs, connection strings)
- Multiple config support and smart project lookup

📖 **See [Getting Started Guide](user-docs/GETTING_STARTED.md) for comprehensive CLI documentation and examples.**

## Repository Structure (User Version)

```
benchkit/
├── benchkit/                  # Core framework
├── configs/                   # Benchmark configurations
└── results/                   # Generated results (auto-created)
```

See [Developer Guide](dev-docs/DEVELOPERS.md) for a more detailed structure definition.

## Defining Your Own Benchmarks

You can easily create your own benchmark by creating a yaml configuration file combining

- One infrastructure provider (aws/docker/local/...)
- One workload (benchmark type) to be executed
- Multiple systems (software) to be tested

📖 **See [Getting Started Guide](user-docs/GETTING_STARTED.md) for information on how to create
benchmark configurations using supported modules.**

## Support Matrix

### Setup / Installation

| system     | local | aws | docker | gcp | azure |
|------------|-------|-----|--------|-----|-------|
| Exasol     | ✗     | ✓   | ✗      | ✗   | ✗     | 
| ClickHouse | ✗     | ✓   | ✗      | ✗   | ✗     |

### Workloads

<!-- link definitions for table headers -->
[estuary]: benchkit/workloads/estuary/README.md "Estuary Warehouse Report"

| system     | tpch | [estuary]       |
|------------|------|-----------------|
| Exasol     | ✓    | ✓<sup>(1)</sup> |
| ClickHouse | ✓    | ✗<sup>(1)</sup> |

Notes:

1. Work in Progress


## Documentation

### For Users

- 📖 [Getting Started Guide](user-docs/GETTING_STARTED.md) - Installation, usage, and examples

### For Developers

- 🔧 [Extending the Framework](dev-docs/EXTENDING.md) - Adding systems, workloads, and features

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the LICENSE file for details.
All names used are copyright and owned by the respective companies.

---

Built with ❤️ for reproducible database benchmarking.
